# 第 12 章 将设计模式应用于模型

> Twelve. Relating Design Patterns to the Model

The patterns explored in this book so far are intended specifically for solving problems in a domain model in the context of a MODEL-DRIVEN DESIGN. Actually, though, most of the patterns published to date are more technical in focus. What is the difference between a design pattern and a domain pattern? For starters, the authors of the seminal book, Design Patterns, had this to say:

Point of view affects one’s interpretation of what is and isn’t a pattern. One person’s pattern can be another person’s primitive building block. For this book we have concentrated on patterns at a certain level of abstraction. Design patterns are not about designs such as linked lists and hash tables that can be encoded in classes and reused as is. Nor are they complex, domain-specific designs for an entire application or subsystem. The design patterns in this book are descriptions of communicating objects and classes that are customized to solve a general design problem in a particular context. [Gamma et al. 1995, p. 3]

Some, not all, of the patterns in Design Patterns can be used as domain patterns. Doing so requires a shift in emphasis. Design Patterns presents a catalog of design elements that have solved problems commonly encountered in a variety of contexts. The motivations of these patterns and the patterns themselves are presented in purely technical terms. But a subset of these elements can be applied in the broader context of domain modeling and design, because they correspond to general concepts that emerge in many domains.

In addition to those in Design Patterns, there have been many other technical design patterns presented over the years. Some of them correspond to deep concepts that emerge in domains. It would be nice to draw on this work. To make use of such patterns in domain-driven design, we have to look at the patterns on two levels simultaneously. On one level, they are technical design patterns in the code. On the other level, they are conceptual patterns in the model.

A sample of specific patterns from Design Patterns will show how a pattern conceived as a design pattern can be applied in the domain model, and it will clarify the distinction between a technical design pattern and a domain pattern. COMPOSITE and STRATEGY demonstrate how some of the classic design patterns can be applied to domain problems by thinking about them in a different way. . . .

STRATEGY (A.K.A. POLICY)
Image
Define a family of algorithms, encapsulate each one, and make them interchangeable. STRATEGY lets the algorithm vary independently from clients that use it. [Gamma et al. 1995]

Domain models contain processes that are not technically motivated but actually meaningful in the problem domain. When alternative processes must be provided, the complexity of choosing the appropriate process combines with the complexity of the multiple processes themselves, and things get out of hand.

When we model processes, we often realize that there is more than one legitimate way of doing them. As we start to describe these options, our definition of the process becomes clumsy and complicated. The actual behavioral alternatives we are choosing between are obscured as they are mixed in with the rest of the behavior.

We would like to separate this variation from the main concept of the process. Then we would be able to see both the main process and the options more clearly. The STRATEGY pattern, already well established in the software design community, addresses this very issue, though the focus is technical. Here it is being applied as a concept in a model and reflected in the code implementation of that model. There is the same need to decouple the highly variable part of the process from the more stable part.

Therefore:

Factor the varying part of a process into a separate “strategy” object in the model. Factor apart a rule and the behavior it governs. Implement the rule or substitutable process following the STRATEGY design pattern. Multiple versions of the strategy object represent different ways the process can be done.

Whereas the conventional view of STRATEGY as a design pattern focuses on the ability to substitute different algorithms, its use as a domain pattern focuses on its ability to express a concept, usually a process or a policy rule.

Example: Route-Finding Policies
A Route Specification is being passed to a Routing Service, whose job is to construct a detailed Itinerary that satisfies the SPECIFICATION. This SERVICE is an optimization engine that can be tuned to find either the fastest route or the cheapest one.

Image
Figure 12.1. A SERVICE interface with options will need conditional logic.

This setup looks OK, but a detailed look at the routing code would reveal conditionals in every computation, making the decision between fastest or cheapest appear all over the place. More trouble will come when new criteria are added to make more subtle choices between routes.

One approach is to separate those tuning parameters into STRATEGIES. Then they can be represented explicitly, passed into the Routing Service as a parameter.

The Routing Service now handles all requests in the same, unconditional way, looking for a sequence of Legs with a low magnitude, as computed by the Leg Magnitude Policy.

This design has the advantages that motivate the STRATEGY pattern in Design Patterns. On the level of application versatility and flexibility, the behavior of the Routing Service can now be controlled and extended by installing an appropriate Leg Magnitude Policy. The STRATEGIES illustrated in Figure 12.2 (fastest or cheapest) are only the most obvious ones. Combinations that balance speed and cost are likely. There may be other factors altogether, such as a bias toward booking cargo on the company’s own transports rather than subcontracting to carry them on the transports of other shipping companies. These modifications could have been made without resorting to STRATEGIES, but the logic would have wound through the internals of the Routing Service and bloated its interface. The decoupling does make it clear and easily testable.

Image
Figure 12.2. Options determined by choice of STRATEGY (POLICY) passed as argument

A fundamentally important rule in the domain, the basis of choosing one Leg over another when building an Itinerary, is now explicit and distinct. It conveys the knowledge that a specific attribute (potentially derived) of an individual leg, boiled down to a single number, is the basis for routing. This makes possible a simple statement in the language of the domain that defines the Routing Service’s behavior: The Routing Service chooses an Itinerary with a minimum total magnitude of the Legs based on the chosen STRATEGY.

Note: This discussion implies that the Routing Service is actually evaluating Legs as it searches for an Itinerary. This approach is conceptually straightforward, and it could make a reasonable prototype implementation, but it is probably unacceptably inefficient. This application will be taken up again in Chapter 14, “Maintaining Model Integrity,” where the same interface will be used with a completely different implementation of the Routing Service.

Image Image Image
When we use the technical design pattern in the domain layer, we have to add an additional motivation, another layer of meaning. When the STRATEGY corresponds to an actual business strategy or policy, the pattern becomes more than just a useful implementation technique (though that too is valuable as far as it goes).

The consequences of the design pattern fully apply. For example, in Design Patterns, Gamma et al. point out that clients must be aware of different STRATEGIES, which is also a modeling concern. A concern purely of implementation is that STRATEGIES can increase the number of objects in the application. If that is a problem, the overhead can be reduced by implementing STRATEGIES as stateless objects that contexts can share. The extensive discussion of implementation approaches in Design Patterns all applies here. This is because we are still using a STRATEGY. Our motivations are partially different, which will affect some choices, but the experience embedded in the design pattern is at our disposal.

COMPOSITE
Image
Compose objects into tree structures to represent part-whole hierarchies. COMPOSITE lets clients treat individual objects and compositions of objects uniformly. [Gamma et al. 1995]

We often encounter, while modeling complex domains, an important object that is composed of parts, which are themselves made up of parts, which are made up of parts—occasionally even nesting to arbitrary depth. In some domains, each of these levels is conceptually distinct, but in other cases, there is a sense in which the parts are the same kind of thing as the whole, only smaller.

When the relatedness of nested containers is not reflected in the model, common behavior has to be duplicated at each level of the hierarchy, and nesting is rigid (for example, containers can’t usually contain other containers at their own level, and the number of levels is fixed). Clients must deal with different levels of the hierarchy through different interfaces, even though there may be no conceptual difference they care about. Recursion through the hierarchy to produce aggregated information is very complicated.

When applying any design pattern in the domain, the first concern should be whether the pattern idea really is a good fit for the domain concept. It might be convenient to move recursively through some associated objects, but is there a true whole-part hierarchy? Have you found an abstraction under which all the parts truly are the same conceptual type? If you have, COMPOSITE will make those aspects of the model clearer, while allowing you to tap into the carefully thought-out design and implementation considerations of the design pattern.

Therefore:

Define an abstract type that encompasses all members of the COMPOSITE. Methods that return information are implemented on containers to return aggregated information about their contents. “Leaf” nodes implement those methods based on their own values. Clients deal with the abstract type and have no need to distinguish leaves from containers.

This is a relatively obvious pattern on the structural level, but designers often do not push themselves to flesh out the operational level of the pattern. The COMPOSITE offers the same behavior at every structural level, and meaningful questions can be asked of small or large parts that transparently reflect their makeup. That rigorous symmetry is the key to the power of the pattern.

Example: Shipment Routes Made of Routes
A complete cargo shipment route is complicated. First the container must be trucked to a railhead, then carried to a port, then transported on a ship to another port, possibly transferred to other ships, and finally transported by ground on the other end.

Image
Figure 12.3. A schematic of a “route” made up of “legs”

An application development team has created an object model to express these arbitrarily long strings of legs that assemble into a route.

Image
Figure 12.4. A class diagram of a Route made up of Legs

Using this model, the developers are able to create Route objects based on booking requests. They are able to process the Legs into the operational plan for the step-by-step handling of the cargo. Then they discover something.

The developers had always thought of a route as an arbitrary, un-differentiated string of legs.

Image
Figure 12.5. The developers’ conception of a route

It turns out the domain experts see the route as a sequence of five logical segments.

Image
Figure 12.6. The business experts’ conception of a route

Among other things, these subroutes may be planned at different times by different people, so they have to be viewed as distinct. And on closer inspection, the “door legs” are quite different from the other legs, involving locally hired trucks or even customer haulage, in contrast to the elaborately scheduled rail and ship transports.

An object model reflecting all these distinctions starts to get complicated.

Image
Figure 12.7. The elaborated class diagram of Route

Structurally the model isn’t so bad, but the uniformity of processing the operational plan is lost, so the code, or even a description of behavior, becomes much more complicated. Other complications begin to surface, too. Any traversal of a route involves multiple collections of different types of objects.

Enter COMPOSITE. It would be nice, for certain clients, to treat the different levels in this construct uniformly, as routes made up of routes. Conceptually this view is sound. Every level of Route is a movement of a container from one point to another, all the way down to an individual leg. (See Figure 12.8.)

Image
Figure 12.8. A class diagram using COMPOSITE

Now, the static class diagram does not tell us as much about how door legs and other segments fit together as the previous one did. But the model is more than a static class diagram. We’ll convey assembly information through other diagrams (see Figure 12.9) and through the (now much simpler) code. This model captures the deep relatedness of all these different kinds of “Route.” Generating the operational plan is simple again, as are other route-traversing operations.

Image
Figure 12.9. Instances representing a complete Route

With a route made of other routes, pieced together end to end to get from one place to another, you can have route implementations of varying detail. You can chop off the end of a route and splice on a new ending, you can have arbitrary nesting of detail, and you can exploit all sorts of possibly useful options.

Of course, we don’t yet need such options. And before we needed those route segments and distinct door legs, we were doing just fine without COMPOSITE. A design pattern should be applied only when it is needed.

Image Image Image
WHY NOT FLYWEIGHT?
Because I referred to the FLYWEIGHT pattern earlier (in Chapter 5), you might have assumed that it is an example of a pattern to be applied to domain models. In fact, FLYWEIGHT is a good example of a design pattern that has no correspondence to the domain model.

When a limited set of VALUE OBJECTS is used many times (as in the example of electrical outlets in a house plan), it may make sense to implement them as FLYWEIGHTS. This is an implementation option available for VALUE OBJECTS and not for ENTITIES. Contrast this with COMPOSITE, in which conceptual objects are composed of other conceptual objects. In that case, the pattern applies to both model and implementation, which is an essential trait of a domain pattern.

I’m not going to try to compile a list of the design patterns that can be used as domain patterns. Although I can’t think of an example of using an interpreter as a domain pattern, I’m not prepared to say that there is no conception of any domain that would fit. The only requirement is that the pattern should say something about the conceptual domain, not just be a technical solution to a technical problem.