# 第 13 章 通过重构得到更深层的理解

> Thirteen. Refactoring Toward Deeper Insight

Refactoring toward deeper insight is a multifaceted process. It will be helpful to stop for a moment to pull together the major points. There are three things you have to focus on.

1. Live in the domain.

2. Keep looking at things a different way.

3. Maintain an unbroken dialog with domain experts.

Seeking insight into the domain creates a broader context for the process of refactoring.

The classic refactoring scenario involves a developer or two sitting at the keyboard, recognizing that some code can be improved, and then changing it on the fly (with unit tests to verify their results, of course). This practice should happen all the time, but it isn’t the whole story.

The previous five chapters present an expanded view of refactoring, superimposed on the conventional micro-refactoring approach.

INITIATION
Refactoring toward deeper insight can begin in many ways. It may be a response to a problem in the code—some complexity or awkwardness. Rather than apply a standard transformation of the code, the developers sense that the root of the problem is in the domain model. Perhaps a concept is missing. Maybe some relationship is wrong.

In a departure from the conventional view of refactoring, this same realization could come when the code looks tidy, if the language of the model seems disconnected from the domain experts, or if new requirements are not fitting in naturally. Refactoring might result from learning, as a developer who has gained deeper understanding sees an opportunity for a more lucid or useful model.

Seeing the trouble spot is often the hardest and most uncertain part. After that, developers can systematically seek out the elements of a new model. They can brainstorm with colleagues and domain experts. They can draw on systematized knowledge written as analysis patterns or design patterns.

EXPLORATION TEAMS
Whatever the source of dissatisfaction, the next step is to seek a refinement that will make the model communicate clearly and naturally. This might require only some modest change that is immediately evident and can be accomplished in a few hours. In that case, the change resembles traditional refactoring. But the search for a new model may well call for more time and the involvement of more people.

The initiators of the change pick a couple of other developers who are good at thinking through that kind of problem, who know that area of the domain, or who have strong modeling skills. If there are subtleties, they make sure a domain expert is involved. This group of four or five people goes to a conference room or a coffee shop and brainstorms for half an hour to an hour and a half. They sketch UML diagrams; they try walking through scenarios using the objects. They make sure the subject matter expert understands the model and finds it useful. When they find something they are happy with, they go back and code it. Or they decide to mull it over for a few days, and they go back and work on something else. A couple of days later, the group reconvenes and goes through the exercise again. This time they are more confident, having slept on their earlier thoughts, and they reach some conclusions. They go back to their computers and code the new design.

There are a few keys to keeping this process productive.

• Self-determination. A small team can be assembled on the fly to explore a design problem. The team can operate for a few days and then disband. There is no need for long-term, elaborate organizational structures.

• Scope and sleep. Two or three short meetings spaced out over a few days should produce a design worth trying. Dragging it out doesn’t help. If you get stuck, you may be taking on too much at once. Pick a smaller aspect of the design and focus on that.

• Exercising the UBIQUITOUS LANGUAGE. Involving the other team members—particularly the subject matter expert—in the brainstorming session creates an opportunity to exercise and refine the UBIQUITOUS LANGUAGE. The end result of the effort is a refinement of that LANGUAGE which the original developer(s) will take back and formalize in code.

Earlier chapters in this book have presented several dialogs in which developers and domain experts probe for better models. A full-blown brainstorming session is dynamic, unstructured, and incredibly productive.

PRIOR ART
It isn’t always necessary to reinvent the wheel. The process of brainstorming for missing concepts and better models has a great capacity to absorb ideas from any source, combine them with local knowledge, and continue crunching to find answers to the current situation.

You can get ideas from books and other sources of knowledge about the domain itself. Although the people in the field may not have created a model suitable for running software, they may well have organized the concepts and found some useful abstractions. Feeding the knowledge-crunching process this way leads to richer, quicker results that also will probably seem more familiar to domain experts.

Sometimes you can draw on the experience of others in the form of analysis patterns. This kind of input has some of the effect of reading about the domain, but in this case it is geared specifically toward software development, and it should be based directly on experience implementing software in your domain. Analysis patterns can give you subtle model concepts and help you avoid lots of mistakes. But they don’t give you a cookbook recipe. They feed the knowledge-crunching process.

As the pieces are fit together, model concerns and design concerns must be dealt with in parallel. Again, it doesn’t always mean inventing everything from scratch. Design patterns can often be employed in the domain layer when they fit both an implementation need and the model concept.

Likewise, when a common formalism, such as arithmetic or predicate logic, fits some part of a domain, you can factor that part out and adapt the rules of the formal system. This provides very tight and readily understood models.

A DESIGN FOR DEVELOPERS
Software isn’t just for users. It’s also for developers. Developers have to integrate code with other parts of the system. In an iterative process, developers change the code again and again. Refactoring toward deeper insight both leads to and benefits from a supple design.

A supple design communicates its intent. The design makes it easy to anticipate the effect of running code—and therefore it easy to anticipate the consequences of changing it. A supple design helps limit mental overload, primarily by reducing dependencies and side effects. It is based on a deep model of the domain that is fine-grained only where most critical to the users. This makes for flexibility where change is most common, and simplicity elsewhere.

TIMING
If you wait until you can make a complete justification for a change, you’ve waited too long. Your project is already incurring heavy costs, and the postponed changes will be harder to make because the target code will have been more elaborated and more embedded in other code.

Continuous refactoring has come to be considered a “best practice,” but most project teams are still too cautious about it. They see the risk of changing code and the cost of developer time to make a change; but what’s harder to see is the risk of keeping an awkward design and the cost of working around that design. Developers who want to refactor are often asked to justify the decision. Although this seems reasonable, it makes an already difficult thing impossibly difficult, and tends to squelch refactoring (or drive it underground). Software development is not such a predictable process that the benefits of a change or the costs of not making a change can be accurately calculated.

Refactoring toward deeper insight needs to become part of the ongoing exploration of the subject matter of the domain, the education of the developers, and the meeting of the minds of developers and domain experts. Therefore, refactor when

• The design does not express the team’s current understanding of the domain;

• Important concepts are implicit in the design (and you see a way to make them explicit); or

• You see an opportunity to make some important part of the design suppler.

This aggressive attitude does not justify any change at any time. Don’t refactor the day before a release. Don’t introduce “supple designs” that are just demonstrations of technical virtuosity but fail to cut to the core of the domain. Don’t introduce a “deeper model” that you couldn’t convince a domain expert to use, no matter how elegant it seems. Don’t be absolute about things, but push beyond the comfort zone in the direction of favoring refactoring.

CRISIS AS OPPORTUNITY
For over a century after Charles Darwin introduced it, the standard model of evolution was that species changed gradually, somewhat steadily, over time. Suddenly, in the 1970s, this model was displaced by the “punctuated equilibrium” model. In this expanded view of evolution, long periods of gradual change or stability are interrupted by relatively short bursts of rapid change. Then things settle down into a new equilibrium. Software development has an intentional direction behind it that evolution lacks (although it may not be evident on some projects), but nonetheless it follows this kind of rhythm.

Classical descriptions of refactoring sound very steady. Refactoring toward deeper insight usually isn’t. A period of steady refinement of a model can suddenly bring you to an insight that shakes up everything. These breakthroughs don’t happen every day, yet a large proportion of the changes that lead to a deep model and supple design emerge from them.

Such a situation often does not look like an opportunity; it seems more like a crisis. Suddenly there is some obvious inadequacy in the model. There is a gaping hole in what it can express, or some critical area where it is opaque. Maybe it makes statements that are just wrong.

This means the team has reached a new level of understanding. From their now-elevated viewpoint, the old model looks poor. From that viewpoint, they can conceive a far better one.

Refactoring toward deeper insight is a continuing process. Implicit concepts are recognized and made explicit. Parts of the design are made suppler, perhaps taking on a declarative style. Development suddenly comes to the brink of a breakthrough and plunges through to a deep model—and then steady refinement starts again.